The story I want to tell today is one of confusion.

[[!tag Bitcoin]]
[[!tag Community]]

<div class="float-right">
[[!img images/escapeTrap.jpg size=400x300]]

</br><i>Confusing translation. By <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/dandownunder/220926841/">dandownunder</a></i>
</div>

I have been a software developer for various decades and in that time the
way that I start a new job or a new task is similar.  It is one of
learning. When I started in a company that creates medical hardware I ended
up spending quite some time reading through books meant for nurses. When I
started in a company that makes a stock-trading platform I had to learn
about the financial industry.  The knowledge of being a software developer
is similar to knowing English or Russian as a novel writer.  It doesn't
mean you have anything interesting to write.  You need to learn.

This is why I love my profession of software developer. I get to do
something completely different on a regular basis.

Learning about Bitcoin was surprising difficult. I've been learning for
almost 4 years and I am certain I will continue for many more.  
I would have to say that from all the industries that I studied, learning
about Bitcoin details has been the hardest.

I have been talking to quite a lot of people over these years, from forums
like reddit and 8btc to chat, email and VOIP talking to the experts.  I
found that I was not alone with my difficulty of discovering pertinent
details about Bitcoin.

The following scenario would happen on a regular basis: A couple of random
people on the internet are in a discussion about some detail. For instance
they talk about the claim that miners would never willingly break the
Bitcoin consensus rules.  
After some time an expert comes in and resolves the conflict by stating
some fact.  In our example, he could say that after the 2012 halving there
were various miners for some hours that continued to mine blocks with 50BTC
reward.

I've always wanted to be so wise and learned that I knew all those facts in
the hope that I could become an expert.

Until now.

In Bitcoin there are currently a very small number of experts. This
generates a handful of problems. The most obvious problem is the one I
outlined above, it makes it hard for new people to enter Bitcoin and become
productive. New people need known experts to help them. Many other problems
are more subtle.

Problems we face today:

* With the experts having more information than the rest of us,
  those experts become authority figures. We need their Ok because we will
  likely do things wrong otherwise.

* Bitcoin is a field that spans Economy, Finance, the history of Money,
  Psychology, various fields in software architecture (databases,
  peer-2-peer networking, cryptography) and probably more. It is impossible
  for any one person to be an expert in all of those.  Yet, when we talk to
  our Bitcoin experts I never once heard any of them say that they would
  rather defer to someone more knowledgeable than themselves.

* Discussions about Bitcoin can be about opinions or about well researched
  facts.  In the current world it is impossible to differentiate fact from
  opinion because we can't independently validate those facts.


*I have become convinced that the first big step we need to make to create
a more healthy Bitcoin ecosystem is to make access to currently well hidden
facts completely open for anyone to access and contribute to.*

Wikimedia [writes](https://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Vision);
> Imagine a world in which every single human being can freely share in the
> sum of all knowledge.

I think that goal is inspiration that Bitcoin could use very well.  I would
like to see a Free Wikipedia for Bitcoin technology.

There are quite a number websites today that have a small amount of
information, typically on one topic for one specific group of users. For
instance people new to Bitcoin. But nothing that combines those ideas and
facts.

A special mention should go to the bitcoin.it website which has a lot of
in-depth information.  Unfortunately most of it is hopelessly outdated and
looking through the discussions it becomes obvious this is because it has
been strictly guarded by a small number of people that would remove without
discussion any opinions not already known to them. This kind of behavior
is the death to cooperation.

The secondary goal, then, should be to create documentation that can not
be censored or controlled.

### BitcoinWiki.git

#### Part of the solution; git.

Git is a tool used for many years by enthusiasts and professionals alike to
create a distributed
[workflow](http://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/).
Anyone can create changes and offer them to the world to accept or reject
based on merit only.  Git allows anyone to start contributing without
permission. It also removes the central ownership. No longer is it needed
to convince one group of the worth of your changes, there may be various
groups each creating what they think is the best version.

#### Lowering the threshold of entry.

While git allows the actual required working together, it is just a basic
layer. Many end users don't want to use git, and that should be perfectly
Ok.  
Much like Wikipedia allows a user to do everything from a web browser, we
need a way to do the same in order to not scare off people that could
really contribute but don't have the technical knowledge to install and use
tools on their machine.

In my search for a solution I found a tool called
[ikiwiki](http://ikiwiki.info/). This is a tool that combines the concept
of a wiki and the concept of distributing control using git.
What one person changes on the website can be merged with what another
person makes at another time. Even when those people use a different
website or a different team to do the work in.

### Starting the revolution.

To start somewhere I present a website that has all the content (including
all revisions back until its start in 2010) copied from what has so far
been the main Bitcoin wiki. I put them online for now at
[bitcoinwiki.github.io](http://bitcoinfactswiki.github.io). This is a simple
website and editing is currently disabled.
The wiki database is converted to be
[markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown), which is a more modern
alternative than the old wiki used. This is also the native format that
ikiwiki uses. Don't worry, you likely are not going to have problems with
it as you may already know it quite well. Markdown is used at many places
like
[github](https://help.github.com/articles/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/)
and Reddit.


The [bitcoinwiki.github.io](http://BitcoinFactsWiki.github.io) is the current
version, the complete history is found in git on github
[here](https://github.com/BitcoinFactsWiki/english)

But even with the full historical content, I do believe we need some heros
to step up and do some major work. Many pages are hopelessly outdated and
there are quite a lot of flaws in the actual content.

Next to that, many pages use rendering-templates that have not been ported
over to the git repository. I would suspect that most of them are in fact
irrelevant. Some closer inspection is needed.

#### Be part of the solution, please help

In my own humble opinion the goal of the old wiki is wrong, it highlighted
all companies in the space which included all gambling sites and places
selling hardware. This is fast-changing information and frankly serves
nobody but the companies.  Likewise, pages about people feel out of place.
It so quickly becomes about being better than anyone else. I don't have a
wikipedia page and I think I'm better off without it.

Actual technical information, backgrounds, overviews and historical facts
would be useful to write down. In my opinion it should be a source of
information where fresh content is shared and research published.

We need people to go in and slice up the bad stuff, move pages to better
locations and move out useless content. I have already spent too much time,
time I could spend on writing better Bitcoin code. So I hope others can
pick up the baton and fork my the bitcoinwiki project on github and work on
making it ready for more and more people to come in add their work and
content.

Following the title of this blogposts, sharing how Bitcoin works and
sharing knowledge about many of its darker corners will allow the
conversation to shift back into a less emotional one.  It is always easier
to discuss topics when opinions are not confused with facts and facts are
not fought with opinions.

